Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to learn how to set up flash messages.
If you have no idea what I mean by flash messages, that's OK.
Let me explain.
So in our previous lesson, we set things up so that after a successful login, the user no longer sees
that weird intermediate congrats screen and they are instead just redirected to this page.
But now they are logged in.
Well, our focus in this lesson is if someone performs a failed login attempt, so, for example, like
this, we no longer want to show them this weird, awkward or intermediate you URL and screen instead.
We would just want to redirect them back to this same you and homepage and maybe show a little red error
message box here that says invalid username and password showing temporary messages like this is commonly
referred to as a flash message.
So let me show you how we can implement this.
So let's jump into our text editor.
Our first step is to install a new package.
So down in the command line, if you're a server is running press control, see to stop it.
And let's run this command NPM install.
And the name of the package that we're interested in is connect, dash, flash, npm install, connect,
dash, flash.
Go ahead and press.
Enter.
Now that we've installed that package, let's tell our server to begin running again.
So npm run watch.
All right, and now let's go leverage that package.
So let's jump in to our app James File.
So Applegate's is the file where we enable new features within our express application.
So first, let's require in that new flash package, maybe right below this const Mongo store line at
the top.
Let's add a new line and let's say CONSED, let's name it Flash and then set that to equal and then
require.
And the package name was Connect Dasch Flash.
OK, now we can leverage this.
So maybe down below this line where we begin using sessions right below this, let's say app dock use
and within the use parentheses, let's call that flash package.
So flash parentheses.
Cool.
So at this point we've added the flash feature to our application.
Now let's go use it.
So let's save this file and then let's jump into our user controller file.
So within our controllers folder, open up user controller J.S. And we are interested in the login function
to be more specific if someone performs a failed login attempt.
So this is a promise and if a promise rejects or if it's not successful, then the catch will take care
of that situation.
So instead of just responding with that weird intermediate screen where it just says invalid username,
instead of that, we just want to redirect the user back to the home page.
So within our function for catch, let's get rid of this response dot send line and instead say response
dot redirect for its value.
Just include quotes in a slash to represent the home page or base you are at this point we run into
an interesting situation and this is where flash messages can help us.
So if we perform a redirect, that's going to be considered a new separate request.
Since we're redirecting to the home page, our router is going to call our home function.
Right.
So down at the very bottom of this file, remember, we have a function for home.
And since there's not going to be a user object within the session because the login just failed, our
else block would run.
So we are rendering the guest template.
Now the question becomes, how can we render this guest template so that it includes a little red warning
box or box that says invalid username and password?
Now, we did learn in an earlier lesson, if we look at this line of code that when you call response
dot render, you can provide a second argument and that's how you can pass data into a template.
However, we need to remember the stateless nature of HTTP requests, meaning when this request runs,
our server has no memory, a login just failed.
And it's not like we always want to show a message that says invalid username and password whenever
we render the guest homepage.
So as we've learned when we need some sort of persistent memory of a previous request, we can leverage
sessions.
So check this out.
Let's go back up to our login function and within our sketch area, right above this response dot redirect
line.
Let's add a new line.
And this is where we can leverage that flash package.
The flash package is going to add a flash object onto the request object so we can say request dot flash.
And now within these parentheses, we give it to arguments.
The first argument is the name of a collection or an array of messages that we want to start building
or adding on to.
So we could call it anything, but let's call it errors.
So quotes errors and then comma.
And for the second argument, this is where you would include the actual message that you want to add
on to this array or collection.
So this could be a string of text that says, sorry, there was a problem.
But in this case, instead of directly typing out a string here, let's instead just say E, right.
Because that's the value that our promise is going to reject with.
And so that will get passed into this function.
So essentially, this is just a string of text that says invalid username, password.
And really all this flash package is going to do is help us add and remove data from our session.
The flash package is super simple.
It's actually only eighty two lines of code.
So we don't really need the flash package.
We could write similar code ourselves, but as we'll see in a few minutes, this package does make our
lives a bit simpler.
So all this line of code here is really doing and you do not need to type this out.
This is just a quick explanation.
But this line is really just going to result in the following, so it's going to look in our sessions
or request session now in a previous lesson, we added a property or object to the session named user.
In this case, it's going to add a property or object named Flash.
And then inside that object, there's going to be a property named errors because that's what we named
our collection.
And this is going to be an array so equals array.
And in this case, we've only pushed one item onto the array, which is that message that's going to
say invalid usernames, password.
Let me get rid of this.
I only type that out to let you know that the flash package is not doing anything amazing.
It's not performing rocket science.
But as we will see shortly, it does simplify things a bit.
All right.
So now that we know that this line of code is going to modify our session data and because we know that's
going to require a trip to the database, which can take some time, we want to be sure to not perform
the redirect until that database action has actually completed.
Our session package will automatically saved the database any time we call response thoughts and or
response redirect.
But there's no guarantee that it would finish in time before the redirect.
So what we can do right below this flash line, let's get rid of this response dot redirect line and
instead let's manually tell our session to save the request session, dot save and then we can provide
it a callback function that it will call once it's actually updated that session data in the database.
So within these parentheses function and now we can redirect.
So response dot redirect.
Let's give it a value of just forward slash for the home page.
OK, and now before we worry about actually displaying an error message on the homepage, let's first
visually see the new session data in our database.
I'm a big fan of visualizing data, so let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
So back in the browser, let's perform a failed log in on purpose.
So just random values.
OK, and we see that it redirected us to the home page.
Now, obviously, there's no error message here because we didn't actually add that yet.
But right now, let's go look at our database.
And I think this will make things crystal clear.
So in Mongo DB Atlas, under collections, under our complex app database, let's look in our sessions
collection.
If you already had this screen open, you might need to click the find button to pull in the latest
data.
OK, but we see one document representing one session and if I click on this session value to actually
expand it and view it, it's got information about the cookie that should be created.
But if I scroll over to the right, you can see after the cookie property, there's a property named
Flash and it's an object.
And you can see it has a property named Errors, which is just an array right within see the square
brackets.
And there's that failed log in, reject message from our login promise promis.
Cool.
So just like before we added a user object onto our session, well now we're adding a flash object to
store any potential messages we would want to show to the user.
And the idea here is that because it's in a session, it's persistent, it's going to stick around for
a while.
So it will be available even after a redirect.
Let me show you what I'm getting at here.
Let's jump back into our text editor within our user controller.
Let's scroll down to the bottom.
We're interested in our home function.
So if a user is not logged in, it's going to render our home guest template.
Well, let's give this render method a second argument.
So comma.
Remember, this is how we can pass data into a template.
So you give it an object and imagine we want it to have a property named Errors Colon and then for its
value, we would just want that errors away from our session data.
We could access that manually by typing request session, dot, flash, dot errors.
But and this is a big reason why I use the flash package.
We don't only want to access that data, we also want to delete it from the session as soon as we've
accessed it.
Right.
Because we only want to show this message to the user once.
So with the flash package, as soon as you access it, it's also going to delete it for you from the
session.
So this does simplify things a bit.
We can just say request flash and give it the name of the collection or array of messages that we are
interested in.
So errors, let's go ahead and save this file and now let's go leverage this data from within our home
guest template.
So within our views folder, let's open up home dash guest SJS.
Let's scroll down to about line number thirty four here.
We should see an opening div with a class of container and p MD five right below that.
That's where we can include that red rectangle error message that says invalid usernames password.
So within an Ejaz template to do something dynamic, we can just say less than percentage and then to
close that tag, it's percentage greater than OK within these tags.
Let's start working with our errors property and it's going to be an array.
Even if there are no errors, it will still be an empty array.
Now, in JavaScript, every array has a method named for each.
Within these parentheses we can provide a function.
So function parentheses, curly brackets and JavaScript will call this function once for each item in
the array within the parentheses.
For our function, let's include a parameter, let's call it message.
OK, and then on this line we would just want to output or print a bit of HTML with that message.
So at the end of this line, let's drop out of dynamic JavaScript mode so percent greater than again
this highlighted part is in Ejaz feature, not a native JavaScript feature.
OK, but then at the beginning of this line we would want to have another opening tag to do something.
Dynamics of less than percentage sign.
OK, now in the middle, let's just output a bit of HTML.
Let's output a div.
So opening and closing div tags and let's give it a few classes of class equals, let's say alert space.
Let's also say alert dash danger.
Let's also say text dash center.
OK, and then in between the div tags, what text do we actually want to include.
Well we want the value of the current item in the array which we can access from this message parameter.
So less than percentage and then percentage greater than in between that we can just say message and
because we would actually want to print or output this instead of just executing this.
We do want to include an equal sign right here, cool, let's go ahead and save this and test it out
back in the browser.
If I refresh without even trying to log in again, I should see that message.
This is just the one time calk that you'll only run into as you're actually in the middle of developing
the feature.
If we refresh again, it should be gone.
The only reason we saw that without actually failing at logging in is because we already had that save
into our session data, remember?
And we tested that out.
We actually saw it in the database.
But the code that deletes it from the session once you've retrieved it, we didn't set that in place
until very recently, but now it's all set up and good to go.
So a new visitor can come to the site if they perform a failed log in.
Cool, it takes him right back to the home page, they see this error message, but if they ever came
back to our website again or if they refreshed or sent a new request, that message goes away.
Perfect.
And just to visually confirm that that session data is now gone, if you go back into Atlas and click
find to reload the latest data.
And then dig into this, you can see now the flash object is empty.
So back in our user controller, the idea is that as soon as we use the flash package to retrieve a
collection instead of updating a collection, it's going to know that we are then ready to remove that
from the session.
And this creates that perfect scenario where the user will see the message once and that's it.
Now, let's change gears.
So at this point, both failed login attempts and successful login attempts are handled smoothly.
Now that we've learned about sessions and flash messages, let's go ahead and improve our user registration
experience.
So first, if there are validation errors with their form data when they submit this form instead of
this awkward intermediate screen with these plain text errors, I think it would make more sense to
show those validation errors in small red rectangles right above the registration form.
Well, that's exactly what we're going to set up in our next lesson.
So let's keep things rolling and I'll see you then.